Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Matty Hero. He is
Professor of Philosophy at Alto University School of Business
in Finland. He is the co-author of anti natal
extinction and the end of procreative self corruption, which
we're going to talk about today. So Matty, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much. It's a pleasure being here.
So I've already had a few conversations on the
show with other authors about anti natal is like
for example, David Benatar, but I, I would like
to start by asking you what is anti natal
is and perhaps looking back in history and into
the contemporary formulations of antenatal is that we have,
is there one single kind of antenatal is out
there? Multiple kinds? And if there are multiple kinds,
what do they have in common?
Yes, there are multiple kinds or at least multiple
understandings of Antenatal. And they all the common feature
is that they all question reproduction in, in one
way or another. But when it comes to specifying
whose reproduction should be questioned and what means, what
that means in practice. There are differences. So some
say that we should only be talking about human
procreation. Others would like to include other sentient or,
or living beings. Some say that education and persuasion
are all that we can do or should do
and others might condone more drastic or coercive methods
of preventing people from having Children.
And do we know how old anti natal is
in our Western tradition?
Mm. Well, they are the same as anti natal
is, is, is as old as the Western culture
and, and perhaps older now, Karim Aer uh Antenatal
is quote philosopher and historian has recently drawn our
attention to an ancient Egyptian document. The Iu Papyrus
from the second millennia p ce. So that's long
before any of the Greek stuff started. And that,
that Pap Papyrus is saying, would that there be
an end of men without conception without birth? Then
would the land be quiet from noise and tumult
be no more. So as Erma points out, this
indicates that anti natal sentiments were expressed even in
writing already centuries before European civilization so called started
with the Greeks.
And since you mentioned the Greeks, they're going all
the way back to them. What expressions of anti
natal can we find in their philosophy?
Well, in Sophocles sixth century BC, we find the
figure of Silenus. Silenus was a mentor and companion
of Dionysus, the God of wine and cus had
prophetic skills and King Midas, the one who turned
everything to gold by his touch. Uh He asked
uh um Silenus, what the best human lot would
be. And the response known as the wisdom of
Silenus was that it would be best not to
be born at all. And if you are uh
are lucky enough to be b and the second
best is to live life as soon as possible,
no one knows for sure what Syle was or
what Sofala was trying to say. But present day
anti Natal Iss hailed this as an early expression
of the creed.
Uh AND what would be some of the other
most prominent thinkers back then? Who argued for some
form of anti Natal is or some of its
other related ISMs? And we're going to talk about
some of those other iss iss later on in
our conversation. But what were some of the other
prominent uh thinkers?
Yes. First of all, it's not well formed. Anti
Natal is back then during the 6th and 5th
centuries. BCE. But apart from Sophocles, other poets mentioned
the wisdom of, of Silenus, the tags of Megara
in his allergies and those he repeats in his
tragedies and Pre Socratic philosophers also joined the party,
Alex Agora was questioning any higher meaning or purpose
in life. And tales of Miletus was saying that
to love one's Children means not having them. Now
that's pretty anti anti Natal and there are others,
but it's quite scattered and the context and meaning
of the preserved fragments is often unclear.
So, something that you also go through in your
book is what you call antenatal list alarms. And
could you tell us about the first one? What
is it that you call the first antenatal alarm?
Yes, the, the alarms. Uh Amanda Zoe and I,
I identify two main points in the, in the
intellectual history of Europe that this play. Well, shall
we say stronger than usual manifestations of antenatal ideas.
The first took place in ancient Greece during the
5th and 4th centuries BC. And one of the
distinctive voices back then was Democritus, uh the founder
of the Atomic school in philosophy. And he thought
that the world is composed of matter of small
uh invisible indivisible particles that come together to form
the visible and divisible object that we can see
and hear and touch. And this is the scientific
worldview that we still more or less accept. But
Democrats also held the view that people, he and
his peers presumably should not have Children of their
own because bringing them up is difficult and the
results are uncertain, anything can happen. So he said
that if people must have Children, then they should
adopt Children from their friends. And this way, they
could see the qualities of the new individuals uh
before they, they take on the task of, of
raising them.
And so you mentioned uh a scientific worldview there,
then the sort of first antenatal is alarm relates
to that and perhaps in a way, also gets
amplified by a scientific worldview.
Mm I mean, and I believe that the wisdom
of silenus and, and other similar fragments are, are
based on a, on a revelation. Uh SORT of
the revelation is that human life has no cosmic
meaning and silenus control his sorrows in endless orgies.
But in the harsh light of the morning, he
will always confront an empty universe devoid of purpose
if I am being poetic here. Uh And now
the scientific worldview suggested by critics amplified this lack
of meaning by saying that they are only atoms
and and their movement in, in the world. And
there are no caring gods who would take care
of people and make their lives worthwhile. Uh Democritus,
no one at that time uh denied the existence
of God, but he that God is not just
another bunch of atoms living somewhere somewhere in a
different place and not caring about humans at all.
So variations of this revelation that life has no
meaning have surfaced from time to time uh in
the ensuing civilization.
So in the book, you argue for a view
that quote the history of Western philosophy as a
2.5 millennia reaction to anti natal sentiments. And that
quote again, human life has no obvious meaning. And
philosophers have been forced to build elaborate theories to
invent imaginary purposes. So could you give us perhaps
a broad explanation for these and then maybe later
we can go through some of the history and
get into more detail here.
Yes, sure. Uh THE work of Plato uh marks
both the first reaction to an anti natal alarm
and the birth of European philosophy. And please note
that this is interpretation and strong and unusual interpretation
of that. The the standard view is that philosophy
has to gradually liberated revolutionary ideas like anti natal
from authoritarian tradition. But Amanda and I go tentatively
against this view and say that since Plato, most
Western philosophy has been a part of the problem
rather than a part of the solution. And, and
here here goes, our our story. Now, Plato presented
against the atoms of democritus, a story of how
the world has come about uh and how there
is cosmic meaning in it after all. Now, according
to Plato, and he is using a myth or
a couple of myths but myths in, in, in
his time, we understood a sort of scientific theories.
So if you cannot uh explain it by your
eyes and ears, then, then you can, if there's
a suitable myth that could be the truth. Now,
anyway, the method is that the earth and the
planets and the stars and all living beings have
been made uh by an artisan, God. Not exactly
a creator, not creating anything from, from nothing but
a composer of things from already existing stuff now
this artisan God started the work from the stars
and the planets and used all the good materials
in shaping them. And when it came to producing
people, only inferior stuff was available and therefore we
are imperfect. So now you know why, why you
are imperfect if you are? I don't know. Uh
ANYWAY, there is a cosmic plan for our perfection.
Uh Originally in our d deficient form, we all
live on our own home stars, everybody has their
own home style and we live in there. But
in birth, we are transferred on earth to become
better. Uh And if our lives go well, then
we can complete the unity of our body, soul
and spirit that's called justice. And then we become
perfect. And when we die, we then go back
to our home stuff. Wow. And we live in
bliss forever contemplating the world of ideas by about
this value of the, the shadows quite a story
then. But it does, it comes from Plato. It
comes from uh his uh work at and it
gives meaning both to our lives and to having
Children. So we cannot leave people hanging in the
stars in the imperfect forms. We have to bring
them down here to complete their creation left half
halfway by the artisan God. And that completion that
striving towards justice. That's the cosmic purpose of our
lives. So here uh well done Plato anti Natal
is rejected. A mission accomplished Godless atomist sent back
to the dark corners.
So and do we know what were the first
reactions to anti natal is or at least two
ideas associated with anti natal is in the Western
tradition and who voiced them?
Yes. Atomist soon recovered and came back. Epicurus was
the main figure in the renewal and continued to
argue that life and death have no particular meaning.
The only only thing we can do is to
avoid pain and try to enjoy moderate pleasures to
be in harmony with ourselves or in other words,
to be happy. Uh Epicurean is has in a
sense lived uh to this day, but it has
a bad name in, in many circles. The idea
of seeking pleasure has been interpreted as living in
lust and debauchery and generally being a an immoral
and nasty and detestable person. So traces of epicurean
is survive in utilitarian theories, but those have similar
images problems.
Uh So epicurean is, it could have been something,
I mean, a position in philosophy that could have
carried Greek pessimism forward.
Uh It could have it, it, it's uh i
it's not impossible, but as we'll see, there were
other disruptions in the way.
Mhm uh And talking about those disruptions, uh I
mean, getting into the second anti natal alarm, you
focus on virtue and Christianity. What kind of virtue
are you referring to here? Exactly. And how does
it relate to anti natal then?
Well, in our modern terms, of victorian virtue or,
or sexual virtue, we mean virtue in its carnal
sexual sense. Some people thought 2000 years ago and
many people still believe so, sex is sinful and
vicious and to be avoided by people of virtue,
that's, that's our sense.
And do you look at Christianity as also constituting
a reaction to anti natal? And if so in
what
waves? Well, that's the interesting bit because Christianity in
the beginning constitute uh constituted an anti anti natal
uh reaction. The second anti natal alarm, in fact,
and there were two main elements uh in this
one, uh anything that has to do with flesh
or material being is bad or it's evil and
only the soul or the spirit uh can be
pure and good. So having Children require sex, sex
is flesh, flesh is evil, therefore, don't have them.
And two early Christian teaching was that the second
coming of Jesus is near, it will happen, happen
during the lifetime of his contemporaries. So the teaching
also was that the the end times will be
terrible, much persecution and suffering. Now, bringing Children to
that kind of world would have been all kind
and and in a word insane.
But these were ideas that we can find among
the early Christians, right?
Mm In, in early Christianity, the the gnostics and
the manics uh advocated anti natal is quite strongly
for, for the reasons that I mentioned and some
fragments of those sects are still ongoing, but they
are rather secretive and, and their current views on
reproduction are not well known, at least to me
now, there's always been something moving during the 19th
century. Some Christian philosophers, notably the Danish existentialist, sir
and Kirkegaard held distinctly anti natal views uh which
is something that not everybody knows. Uh ANYWAYS. And
as for modern development, there were for a while,
internet groups advocating Christian anti natal, but they were
small and they seem to have disappeared now. And
of course, official churches uh all take a very
dim view on any such views arguing that anti
natal is, is a godless doctrine that rejects God's
greatest gift to humankind, to gift of life.
So still on the topic of Christianity in the
book, you will also talk about the process of
philosophizing Christianity. Uh TELL us about that and what
were some of the main reactions to both pro
Natal and a anti Natal in that process?
Yeah, it's quite an interesting story. The Nordics and
the manic and irritated official states who supported Christianity.
And so something needed to be done about the
challenge. Now, Augustine of Hippo produced a philosophical response
that was loosely based on Plato's worldview, Amanda. And
I are not claiming that, that the church uh
actually uh ordered this, this philosophy from Augustin. But
but there is a, there is a connection in
there. Now, this time, the meaning of human life
was to complete the work of the Christian God.
Remember that it was the artisan God whose work
needed completion the last time around now, it's the
work of the Christian God. So not an almighty
thing then, but whatever we live our lives in
whatever tedium or misery that we may face. But
if we abide by the Christian God's rules, then
after our death, we get to enjoy everlasting bliss
in heaven or as Augustine called it the city
of God. Now, Augustin struggled a little with the
teaching of Paul the apostle uh who had very
critical views on, on sex, but so sex flesh,
blah, blah, blah. But in the end, uh Augustin
took refutes in Paul's dictum. It is better to
marry than to burn uh and justified reproduction by
that. Now, the entire passage in the letter to
the Corinthians says, but if they do not have
sufficient self control, they should marry for, it's better
to marry than to burn with passion. So Paul
was pretty clearly uh frowning upon Caro relations. But
somehow the Christian churches starting with Augustine of Hippo
had been able to turn the fire on extramarital
affairs only and not, not all sex and reproduction.
But so then there was a persecution of the
mannequins and other
agnostics, right? Yes. Coincidentally with the philosophizing of Christianity
after Augustine's work, all heretic sects were more or
less persecuted to death. The methods including genocide were
needed. Antenatal is, was a really dangerous thing to
believe in.
So continuing on this history that we are exploring
here, then you talk about a more recent reaction
to unquestioned pro natal that have occurred for the
past 300 years or so. What characterizes this reaction
that is based as you say in the book
on happiness and freedom? And how does it relate
to Antenatal?
Yes, the the pendulum of, of anti natal alarms
or challenges and pro natal reactions to them. They
are still still in motion and yes, freedom and
happiness and all that. I, I think that we'll
return to all this later if you don't mind.
Sure. Uh In the book, you also say that
uh and this is going back to an earlier
question related to the other ISMs that were associated
with Antenatal is that it can be conceptually morally,
ideologically and politically connected to these other ISMs and
practices. Uh I mean, uh perhaps uh let's go
through the list here. So starting with the abortion.
Uh COULD you explain what's obvious,
obvious prevents a birth?
Uh And altruism
if you believe that life is suffering, you don't
bring new life lives into existence
uh and animal rights
and you can extend your altruism to nonhumans by
um by not bringing them into existence either.
So, another one atheism.
Uh No, God, no meaning why have Children? Ecology,
uh ecology and environmentalism. No more Children, no more
increased environmental decay, uh egoism or do you like
Democrat who just want to avoid the burden of
raising your Children and be egoistic about it.
And
euthanasia, if life is suffering, why continue it?
Extinction is
if no one has Children, humankind will eventually cease
to exist. So antenatal will lead to lead to
it according to most antenatal
lists. So uh I guess an unexpected one here,
machine consciousness.
Well, if we produce sentient machines and we are
dangerously close to doing that. I mean, intelligence or
artificial intelligence already says intelligent now sentience to that.
And then, well, it's a kind of reproduction. We
are making machine babies at that point.
Uh In Natal.
Well, Natal and pro Natal, they are opposites of
anti Natal. So obviously, mhm
neocolonialism,
if only certain people should stop having Children, the
likely candidates in our current world will be the
inhabitants of the global South. So neo colonialism. Yes.
Uh Nihilism.
If there is no meaning, can there be any
values
uh pessimism.
Uh The starting point of anti Natal is life
is evil.
Uh PRO moralism,
uh pro moralism and connected to that suicide. Some
anti natal take the symmetrical view that if life
should not be initiated, they should not be perpetuated
either. It's a, it's a contested thing.
And the final one that I guess would also
be connected to animal rights veganism.
Yes, if you are an Antenatal because because you
want to avoid bringing about lives with suffering, then
the idea of not exploiting nonhumans in factory farming
or in any way for your own ends might,
might appeal to you as well.
So, and among all of those in the book,
in section two, you decide to focus on extinction
is why did you decide to focus on this
is specific, specific,
if uh so to speak, the, it's the elephant
in the room of uh contemporary antenatal. Um We
know that it's there but, but no one wants
to talk about it. If, if no one has
Children, then humankind will cease to exist. In fact,
uh but many people who call themselves anti Natal
lists either deny this or try not to talk
about it. And the idea seems to be too
frightening somehow. So, Amanda and I go through different
scenarios and try to demonstrate that the idea is
not that frightening. All things considered if all human
beings one day want to end reproduction, if big,
if, but if, if they want to do this,
knowing that the species will a few decades later
go extinct, then what's the problem? Of course, some
people say that life is sacred and so on
and so forth, but that's already covered. They, they
will not agree to become Antenatal lists in the,
in the first place. That's bad for Antenatal but
has no effect on the original idea that universally
voluntary human extinction if you think about it. And,
and if you get the idea, it, it's, well,
it's very unlikely but it's nothing to be scared
of.
So in order to uh explore more, the idea
of extinction is anti Natal is more generally, let's
talk about some common ideas in anti natal is
here. So what constitutes a good life and a
bad life? And what why does that matter for
anti natal lists?
Good question and hotly debate. I am, I am
myself on record saying that everybody should be allowed
to determine the goodness or badness of their own
lives for themselves. I have been a why is
early because that's in a 1990 publication on the
quality of life. So I'm well covered here. So
uh some antenatal lists believe that all human authentic
lives lives are bad in an objective sense and,
and for them, this is a natural justification for
the abuse lives are bad, don't create them.
And when it comes to being against reproduction through
which process do anti natal anti natal lists arrive
at that position. What philosophical path do you think?
Do you think? Exactly.
Hm. There is the all lives are bad approach.
Uh I have my doubts about that one simply
because people are not buying it. They say nonsense.
My life is good and so is my neighbor's
life no use trying to convince them once they
have made up their minds on that one, then
there's the Children have not given the permission to
be brought into existence. T again, I have my
practical doubts. People are not getting that they say.
But I'm happy and grateful that I was brought
into existence. Why wouldn't my Children be end of,
end of discussion? And finally, there is the so
called frik argument. The, the word industry seems to
be that I presented its first formulation in 2004.
I doubt that I was the first, but I'll,
I'll take it, I'll take the accolade anyway. My
point was that wildlife can be good or they
can be bad. You cannot know what, what your
child's life would be like. Therefore, if you are
risk averse person, decision maker, then you don't have
that child. And the usual objections to this are
that a bit of badness is not what life
is all about. Stop mourning and that the probability
of a truly horrible life is very, very small.
We take risks like that every day crossing the
streets. People say, well, your question though was what
philosophical path uh do you take now the arguments
from low quality of life credited to David Benton,
lack of consent credited to C and Citroen and
risk credited to me, they are roughly consequentialist or
outcome oriented. And apart from those, some maintain that
being brought into a life that is manipulated by
other people is a wrong. Julio Cabrera is the
main, main name here. And Amanda and I have
been moving into this Cabrera direction in our own
own way. Don't know with what success
and in your view, would this position against reproduction
extend to all sentient beings or only humans?
Well, the argument, arguments from lack of consent and
manipulation only apply to human beings because they are
the ones who can consent and, and be manipulated
in that sense. But the argument from quality of
life and risk can easily be extended to all
sentient beings and both David Pelata and I do
extend them.
What arguments do you use to support the voluntary
extinction of our species even going against some current
ethical ideals?
Actually, I don't think that I need arguments to
support the voluntary extinction of, of humankind. If no
one objects to the idea, then again, what's the,
what's the problem? Uh What are the current ethical
ideas now that, that I should be comparing this
to, well, two interpretations, one avoidance of unnecessary suffering
and respect for autonomy, the happiness and, and freedom
that you, you mentioned earlier. No problem. They, they
are compatible with, with Antenatal and two sanctity of
life and the continuation of the species. The argument
from there is just simply circular. We had to
keep going because we have to keep going. So
there's no mileage in that argument in my book.
And how would you characterize contemporary Western anti Natal?
I wouldn't, I don't know, know enough about the,
the field except that it's quite diverse and, and
finding it its theater. Um And our book is
an attempt to focus the discussion a little, I
may have, may have initiated the argument from, from
risk 20 years ago. But I, the next I
heard of Antenatal was two years ago when Amanda
emailed me and asked me uh to her, her
podcast program telling me that I'm one of the
greatest Antenatal lists of all, all time.
So let's get a little bit into arguments for
and against having Children. So what would you say
are perhaps some of the most common and standard
arguments for having Children?
Mm With this one, II, I just refer you
to, to the very accessible and Antenatal handbook by
Lawrence Anton. And the even more accessible. The ABC
of Antenatal Culinary book by life sucks. It's all
told in those. So no pun intended. But life
is too short to go here to go through
all the excuses. It has always been done. God
ordains it. Life is a gift. Your country needs
more producers, consumers and canon for the and so
on and so forth.
Oh, ok. So perhaps what are the ones or
the, the ones that you would say are the
strongest against having Children?
Well, I already listed the three main academic arguments
but the practical arguments of course ranges from the,
from the personal to the political Children don't fit
in my life plan. I would be a bad
parent. The world is becoming a horrible place to
live. You know, I cannot take the responsibility for
a new life under these circumstances, you, you open
open a magazine's lifestyle section and you will find
these.
So we've covered basically procreation here. But what do
you mean by procreative self corruption in the
book? Well, if I, if I may 1st uh
Amanda and um and my argument in, in the
book, we have a double argument in here and
this leads me to procreative uh self corruption. So
our double argument is that first, anyone who reproduces
opens up the possibility of further reproduction, their Children
will have Children and so on. And so so
sooner or later, some of the children's children's children's
Children will have horrible lives. Not necessarily the first
one, not, not necessarily your Children, not necessarily their
Children, but further on down the line. It's inevitable.
If, if this goes on, then somebody will have
the horrible life, that's how life goes. And it
is with assuming that kind of a responsive uh
notion of responsibility. It's your fault, don't do it.
Uh So secondly, you can then raise your Children
to be antenatal list. You can stop the chain
by like that. So now you have the Children,
you uh make sure that they are happy and,
and you make sure that they, they will never
have Children, but uh you are very unlikely to
do so because if you have broad meaning into
your own life by reproducing, you probably want your
Children to have the same opportunity and you want
them to think that you are a good person.
So in all likelihood, you will bring them up
to be pro natal lists like yourself. And in
doing so, you impose your prenatal mentality and lifestyle
on them. When they are too young to form
their views for themselves, you manipulate them into being
your mental clones. This is where we uh and
Amanda come close to Julio Cabrera. Then what do
we mean by procreative self corruption? Well as Amanda
and I define it, it's a combination of the
two factors, opening up the possibility of the horrible
life sometimes in the future and having to resort
to manipulating your Children in reproductive matters. So by
having a child and then having to make decisions
about its upbringing, you corrupt yourself in at least
one of the one of three ways you make
yourself responsible for a horrible future life, you force
your Children to do the same or you force
your Children to be antenatal lists and thereby deprive
them of the happiness that you have yourself achieved
that in.
Could you explain this concept of need frustration? I
mean, what does it mean in your view and
what do you consider right and wrong in regards
to it? Not basic frustration can be, can be
seen as the the only thing that is bad
in itself. It's the only intrinsic negative value. If
what I do does not lead to anyone's basic
need frustration, then good and fine, I'm allowed to
do it. But if what I do does lead
to someone else's basic need frustration, then I'm probably
not allowed to do it. Now, by reproducing I
one open the pathway to the horrible future life
of suffering and to force myself to manipulate my
Children. Uh EITHER to an, an anti natal mindset
to close the pathway or to a pro natal
mindset to keep them happy. Now, suffering and being
manipulated are I believe the main forms of basic
need, frustration. Therefore, I should not reproduce.
So, in the book, you also criticize some of
the most popular recurrent arguments for anti natal. So
let's go through each of them and then talk
about the alternative. You suggest uh starting with arguments
from poor quality of life. What do you make
of them? Are they convincing at all or not?
They are convincing to me personally, I believe that
no life would have been better than my life.
What I don't believe is that people in general
would be convinced by this life is good. They
say, and that's the end of the argument.
A and what about the asymmetry of good and
bad?
This is implied in my, in my need approach.
We should not bring about bad lives, even the
eventual future bad life because that would involve causing
bad uh allowing basic need frustration in my vocabulary.
Now, some say that we should bring about good
lives though the argument from asymmetry has it that
while there is an obligation to avoid bringing about
bad lives, there is no corresponding duty to promote,
bringing about good ones. And I say that we
have no obligation to do so because non existent
beings don't have any needs. So I think that
my, my way is more elegant and I uh
I must drop a year again 1994 in my
book, Liberal Utilitarianism. And I applied ethics in a
footnote, I say exactly that there is no need
to become into existence. So uh no need need
based argument about that. So they basically the the
basic needs of those who don't exist, cannot be
frustrated simply because they don't have any. They are
not there, there's no one there, but I can
understand this and, and looking in into your eyes,
I can see that you understand this. But this
argument is far, far, far, far too complicated for
members of the general public to understand nonsense. They
say I'm happy to be alive. And so would
my unborn Children and denying them that happiness means
frustrating their needs. Whatever you say, Mr philosopher, smarty
pants and no amount of argumentation will change their
minds. So no way. Symmetry for them, I think.
So, perhaps another kind of argument that it's also
hard for the general public to understand. What do
you make of arguments based on the lack of
consent?
Yes, like the other two, it's just unintuitive non
existing individuals cannot consent to being bored. No, but
they cannot consent to not be born uh either.
So, talking about uh consent in their case seems
to be somehow off target or even ridiculous. It
does have a place somewhere in the anti natal
argumentation. It does have a distinct place in there
but it just too complicated to, to be used
outside the specialist discussion or that's what I think.
So, getting into your alternative argument, then you say
that what near universal meaning in life can be
secured, but only by imposing a pro natal lifestyle
upon new individual individuals in a manipulative way that
we should no longer consider attractive or acceptable. So,
could you explain the argument here and what would
be exactly the anti natal argument?
Yes. Our whole book is based on the premise
that European culture has been in search of meaning
for the duration of its existence, the wisdom of
silenus and other expressions of ancient Greek pessimism evidence
that people felt an absence of a greater purpose.
Plato's theory explained that we are here to complete
an artist on God's work. And Augustine of Hippo's
version of Christianity said the same in terms of
the Christian God, we are actors, characters uh in
a divine comedy and it is our job to
make God great. Again, we can use that slogan
uh somewhere. Well, in, in time, of course, uh
religion faded away from, from people's minds and the
image of God grew even in, in the minds
of those who believed in God, the image of
God grew weaker and weaker. So in the secularized
parts of the world, no one can seriously argue
that the meaning of our lives is to have
Children to please God doesn't work like that. And
this raises the question, where should we find the
meaning then? And the current response as far as
I can see, uh as far as I can
see with Amanda seems to be in self fulfillment
through having off. That's the lifestyle section as today.
So when it comes to finding purpose or meaning
in life, what would you say would be the
main differences between doing it via a pro natal
route versus an anti natal route?
Oh, there's a, there's a difference anti natal don't,
don't have to find a bigger cosmic meaning to
their lives. Life can be just about bearable, but
it's, it is void of meaning and purpose. So
let's get rid of it by stopping reproduction. At
least it's only the poor prono natal who have
to struggle here. They want life to continue, but
to what avail they have to find a purpose
and meaning. And if philosophy and theology uh don't
help, then it must be in the activity itself,
making more life is meaningful because making more life
gives our life its meaning, it's circular. But there
you go.
So taking into account what we talked about earlier
when it comes to the main current arguments in,
in anti Natal is how they are difficult for
the general public to understand they are really an
intuitive in what ways would you say your argument
here could strengthen the anti Natal is movement.
It's early days yet to say anything, anything about
that, Amanda and I have been working together only
a couple of years and we are still looking
for the perfect convincing, understandable argument for anti natal.
The the idea of not having Children is so
strange to most people that it's difficult to express
it in a palatable form. I think that the
the risk part of our argument that parents make
themselves responsible for a very bad life somewhere in
the future, it could resonate with quite a few
in these times of political turmoil and ecological decay.
Of course, the manipulation part of the argument is
a harder sell. It's basically claiming that parents commit
their Children to procreative slavery. So I'm I'm not
really holding my my breath in that.
So finally, in the book, you go through some
of or perhaps all of the possible roots for,
as you say, ending procreative self corruption and having
an anti natal society. So let's talk about them
starting with the big yellow button or technological removal
of suffering. What would these
1313 ways and means that we live? OK. So
the big yellow but the technological removal of suffering,
right? The the David Pierce solution, we cannot make
people uh to stop having Children. So let's stop
suffering in some other way by medicine and technology.
In the book. I think that Amanda and I
just say that this is not going to happen.
It just isn't uh on hindsight, I would add
to this that even if it were successful, then
it would not remove the problem of parental manipulation.
But that's the topic of some future book or
article.
So another button, the big orange button. This one
is about immortality by biomedical gerontology. What do you
make of it?
Yes, it's a, it's a way way of being
anti natal but avoiding the demise or at least
a quick demise of, of humankind. So no more
Children but people live forever. Uh IF not met
by external violence, of course. So it's a nice
idea if you happen to like it, go for
it if you must as long as you don't
have Children
and, and the big red button obliteration of humankind.
Yes. Well, that would solve the problem of, of
suffering once and for, for all I am a
voluntary human extinction is myself. So I would say
go ahead if, if no one objects uh then
again, someone will object. Uh There, there's an ongoing
discussion within certain anti natal circles on the advisability
of talking about this opinion publicly at all.
So we have a few more buttons here. The
violet one is immigration to virtual reality.
So this would mean uploading our minds to a
computer world and living forever in digital or, or
in the future, whatever more advanced bliss world, aren't
we already? Anyway? Um Our quite innovative uh uh
if I say so myself, objection to this one
was that it would be a form of reproduction.
Uh If it's brought to its conclusion, uh our
minds would not be moved to virtual uh reality
in this mind, uploading, instead we would die and
someone else would have to assume a life based
partly on our experience. So in other words, that
would not be antenatal at all.
So uh two more buttons, uh the blue one
is irreversible collective infertility. What is that
about? Yes, it's an alternative to the big red
button. It would be kinder to let people live
out their lives, just not having Children. And that's,
that's the the point here. And if I recall
our reaction to this was yuck, really? So instead
of a nice clean demise, you would commit the
remaining generations to meaningless misery for, for the rest
of their lives. So not our cup of tea.
So, and the last button before we move on
to other alternatives, the big green button humankind makes
room for other species.
Yes, sir. Patricia mccormack's brilliant abolitionist, vitalism, humankind uh
dies away voluntarily, but with its last caring practices
leaves a mark and uh lives on in the
harmonious without humans uh world to come, we didn't
quite see how that would be done in practice.
But yeah, go for it. I say no, any
anything with, without reproduction.
And then there's also other alternatives like anti natal
superwomen or superman. What does this mean?
Yeah, that would be a person with superpowers who
comes to the rescue devices. An anti natal plan
gets everyone to accept and, and off we go
off, we go literally uh wonderful, of course. But
uh let's say highly improbable.
And what about an anti natal list dictatorship?
Unfortunately, that one is a more probable scenario and
it's, it's not a good one. Lots of suffering,
uncertain outcome. I wouldn't, I wouldn't suggest it.
And then there's also the idea of an anti
natal list cult or religion. What do you think
about it?
Mm. Mm. Well, it was already tried by the
gnostics and the man and ended up in, in
tears. But, but different time it might, might work
a nice new age movement to uh towards antenatal
and who knows someone could try
then uh one that would probably be a little
bit more palatable to modern years. Anti natal liberal
democracy.
Yeah. Mm. This is not in sight for the
time being. That's the problem I wouldn't mind. But
the, the, the world doesn't really seem to be
developing into that direction or is it, I mean,
more freedom of opinion, reproductive autonomy coming back to
the freedom and happiness. Again, realization of the horrors
of the world or maybe something, something is brewing.
It would be nice.
And what about rational persuasion? Do you think that
could work?
Mm. It's, it is the only ethical way to,
to proceed. It doesn't seem to be working fantastically,
but perhaps it's early, early days yet, perhaps liberal
democracy and rational persuasion together will move people's minds.
So we just, we, we have to believe in
that to continue with this work. So fingers crossed.
Uh And there's also the alternative of canning of
reason. What is
the kind of reason is, is at the same
time, the the most difficult and the and the
easiest idea to, to explain now, the more difficult
uh uh is that it, it's philosophical Georg Wilhelm
Friedrich Hegel, the 18th and 19th century German philosopher
suggested that the world is developing pretty much without
human intention. There are ideas that clash and develop
uh but humankind is for all intents and purposes,
just a spectator in this play in the end,
according to Hegel, freedom will be victorious and we
can only admire its its blossoming from the audience.
Well, be that as it may in the real
world, the idea is simple. What we think we
are doing bigger forces are already moving us towards
the end of reproduction. People's self-interest, reduce birth rates,
pollution reduces sperm counts, education reduces uh women's willingness
to have Children and so on. So according to
this cunning of reason thing, we don't have to
do anything about it. Antenatal is, is already on
the way.
So one final route then uh the root of
the benevolent machine.
Yes. And finally the technological version of the cunning,
cunning of reason, machine intelligence so-called is increasing in
efficiency and scope and uh sooner or later it
is predicted there will be a computer. Uh THAT
is who is cleverer and kinder than we are.
And that computer, if it has access to everything
else in the world can decide to help humankind.
The machine thinks people will never on their own,
stop their suffering. So they need assistance. And then
the benevolent omnipotent machine presses the big red button
and we are all history. Oh, happy day.
So uh let me just ask you one last
question. Uh The, this will be the last question
of our conversation today and regarding these different possible
routes, which are the ones that you would support
the most. Do you think that any of them
is superior to all the others or would you
support perhaps a combination of them
national persuasion is the, is the only thing that
we can explicitly do. And then of course, follow
the developments of is the cult coming somewhere. If
the, if the liberal in liberal democracy are tendencies
that go towards Antenatal is and then the answer
for now is no, they are are not because
it isn't happening in the global South and in
the global North we are now worrying about the
population, native population of, of our own own country.
So uh restaurant per population.
OK. So the book is again anti Natal Extinction
and the end of procreative self corruption. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description box of
the interview. And uh Matty, apart from the book,
would you like to tell people where they can
find you and the rest of your work on
the internet?
And I think that the exploring Anti Natal podcast
site has all my exploits listed somewhere probably in
the exploring anti Natal podcast number 65 which is
the first episode that I and I, I did
together. I, I think that in, in the comments
of that uh they are whatever they are called
citation trees or, or source trees or, or whatever
the million, all the millions of things that I've
done in my life.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a great pleasure to talk with
you. Thank you Ricardo. It has been my pleasure
and honor.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
Learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno, Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew
Whitting Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger and H
her meal and Lain Jung Y and the K
he Mar Smith J Tom Hummel s friends, David
Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego and Jan
Punter Romani Charlotte bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo
Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G Alman, Sam Ofri and
YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry Franca Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary
FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams Di Costa Anton. Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior,
Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark
Kempel Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson
Ismael Bensley Man George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander, Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Luca Stina. Tom Vig. And Bernard N
Cortes Dixon Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian
Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.